Haunted with and hunting for viruses

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7089303/

SHA: c51c4f6146d0c636bc4dc3839c16b9e3ef52849a

Authors: Gao, George Fu; Wu, Ying
Date: 2013-08-07
DOI: 10.1007/s11427-013-4525-x
License: cc-by

Abstract: nan

Text: pecially with next-generation sequencing (NGS) for new virus genome discovery, e.g., Ruben Donis et al. [10] sequenced a bat-derived influenza virus genome by using NGS in 2012, raising a serious question as to whether or not our seasonal or pandemic flu might have another reservoir host. Chen and colleagues [11] confirmed the SFTSV independently by using NGS. Indeed, metagenomics analysis has yielded a great deal of new viruses, especially from the environment. Our actively hunting for new viruses has made some significant contributions for our understanding of virus ecology, pathogenesis and interspecies transmission.

Science China Life Sciences has focused on this hot topic in the event of the H7N9 outbreak after a comprehensive overview of the topic addressing HPAIV H5N1 in 2009 in the journal [12] [13] [14] . In this issue, six groups have been invited to present their recent findings on the emerging viruses, in addition to a previous report on H7N9 [3] .

Shi [15] reviewed recent discoveries of new viruses or virus genomes from bat. Bat is believed to harbor many more viruses than we ever thought as a reservoir host or even a susceptible host [16] . After the SARS-CoV virus, we have been actively seeking for new coronaviruses from bat and have yielded many of them, including potential human infecting HKU-1, 4, 5 and 9 [17, 18] . Recent MERS-CoV infection is another example for severe disease caused by used-to-be-less pathogenic coronaviruses. Shi and colleagues [19] by using NGS have discovered many unknown animal viruses from bat, especially some important paramyxoviruses and reoviruses. Filovirus has also been identified in bat with potential severe outcomes. Lyssaviruses (with many genotypes, including rabies virus) in the Rhabdoviridae family have been linked with severe fatal human cases, even in the developed countries, including Australia, with the bites of bats in the city [20, 21] . The potential roles of these viruses in bats for interspecies transmission are yet to be elucidated.

Tan and colleagues [22] specifically focused on the newly-emerged MERS-CoV. The virus was identified in 2012 in the Middle East with some exported cases to Europe. In 2013 the virus has been re-emerging and expanding its borders to more European countries. In the initial diagnosis, the pan-coronavirus real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay played a very important role for the identification of the causative agents. By using this method, scientists detected an expected-size PCR fragment for the corresponding conserved region of ORF1b of the replicase gene of a coronavirus. This is another example that molecular biology methods played for the discovery of new pathogens. Soon the receptor used by MERS-CoV to enter the host cells was identified [23] and the molecular basis of the receptor binding to the virus was also elucidated recently [8] .

Enterovirus has been known as serious human pathogens for a long time but their significance to the public health has been emphasized by the emergence of enterovirus 71 in 1998 as a serious pathogenic agents for children in Taiwan [24] and re-emerged in mainland China in 2008 [25] . In this issue, Duan and colleagues [26] summarized the findings of new enteroviruses by using NGS. Because of the application of new NGS technology they also challenged the Koch's postulates. A new model of Koch's postulates, named the metagenomic Koch's postulates, has provided guidance for the study of the pathogenicity of novel viruses. The review also provided a detailed description of the NGS and related molecular methods for the virus discovery followed by a list of new enteroviruses found in human feces. These include viruses in the family of Piconaviridae, Parvoviridae, Circoviridae, Astroviridae and Polyomaviridae.

Yu Xue-Jie and colleagues [27] reviewed the new bunyavirus, SFTSV, identified in China. As the virus discoverers, they have overviewed the whole process of the discovery, which is helpful and meaningful for the new virus discoveries in the future. The disease caused by SFTSV, with a CFR of 12%, had been in China for a couple of years before the causative agent was finally identified. There are still a lot of questions remained unknown for this new virus and vigorous studies are in great need. The transmission route of the virus has not been clarified but tick as vector is suspected. Domestic and wild animals, e.g., goats, boars, cattle and dogs, are believed to be the virus-amplifying hosts. Therefore the effective control measures are still under evaluation. Vaccines protecting the SFTSV infection are under its way in Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Recently a similar virus has been identified in both Japan and USA (a new name of Heartland virus was proposed for the US virus) [9] .

In addition to new viruses infecting human beings, some new viruses infecting animals but their public health significance needing to be further evaluated, have also been discovered. The new flavivirus, duck egg-drop syndrome virus (DEDSV), is a good example. Su and colleagues [28] reviewed the characterization of the DEDSV and its disease form in this issue. The virus was found closely-related to a long-time-known virus, Tembusu virus [29, 30] . Initially, the disease was only found in egg-raising ducks but soon it was found in pigeons, chickens and geese [31, 32] . Yet the transmission vector, though mosquitoes are suspected, has not been identified. Due to the public health concerns of its related viruses, potential human infection of DEDSV should be evaluated.

Research on insect viruses is reviving in recent years. In this issue, Zhou and colleagues [33] reviewed the newly-identified insect viruses in China. Insects are the largest group of animals on the Earth therefore they also carry many more viruses. Studies on these viruses can provide useful knowledge for our understanding about animal or human infecting viruses. More importantly, modification and application of insect-infecting viruses can be used as effective biologicals for the control of insect pest. The new viruses identified include Wuhan nodavirus (WhNV), a member of family Nodaviridae; Dendrolimus punctatus tetravirus (DpTV), a new member of the genus Omegatetravirus of the family Alphatetravirida; Ectropis obliqua picorna-like virus (EoV), a positive-strand RNA virus causing a lethal granulosis infection in the larvae of the tea looper (Ectropis obliqua), the virus a member of the Flaviridae family.

While we are enjoying ourselves with the civilization of modern societies, the ecology has ever been changing. Human beings encounter more ecology-climate-changing problems, including the zoonotic pathogens. We have to face some unknown pathogenic agents passively. To get ourselves well prepared we also ought to actively hunt for unknown pathogens. Prediction and pre-warning can only be realized by knowing more about the unknown. This is especially true for infectious agents.