California has been actively and extensively planning with our local public health and health care delivery systems. Here are some of the things we are already doing:  . . As in any public health event, our Medical and Health Coordination Center has been activated and is coordinating response efforts across the state and preparing for possible community transmission. . In coordination with the CDC, state and local health departments, we are actively responding to cases of COVID-19. . The Public Health Department is supporting hospitals and local public health laboratories in the collection of specimens and testing for COVID-19. . California activated the State Operations Center to its highest level to coordinate response efforts across the state. . Governor Gavin Newsom requested the Legislature make up to $20 million available for state government to respond to the spread of COVID-19. . California made available some of its emergency planning reserves of 21 million N95 filtering facepiece masks for use in certain health care settings to ease shortages of personal protective equipment. . We are providing information, guidance documents, and technical support to local health departments, health care facilities, providers, schools, universities, colleges, elder care and congregate living facilities and childcare facilities across California. . California obtained approval to provide meal service during school closures to minimize potential exposure to the coronavirus. These meals are available at no cost to low-income children – and are not required to be served in a group setting – to ensure kids receive nutritious meals while schools are temporarily closed. . The state directed mass gatherings be postponed or cancelled to slow the spread of the virus. . The Franchise Tax Board is providing a 90-day extension to file California tax returns for taxpayers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. . CalTrans launched a statewide educational campaign on more than 700 electronic highway signs, urging all Californians to be more diligent about containing the spread of the virus.  . The state is allowing local and state legislative bodies to hold meetings via conference calls while still meeting state transparency requirements.  . The California Business, Consumer Services and Housing Agency released guidance for homeless assistance providers in the state. . The California Department of Public Health is coordinating with federal authorities and local health departments that have implemented screening, monitoring and, in some cases, quarantine of returning travelers.  . In coordination with state and local health departments, we have actively managed suspect and confirmed cases of COVID-19 patients. . California worked in partnership with the federal government to aid in the safe return of 962 Californians from the Grand Princess cruise ship. This mission centered around protecting the health of the passengers, and ensuring that when the passengers disembarked, the public health of the United States, the State of California, and partner communities was protected. . 24 million more Californians are now eligible for free medically necessary COVID-19 testing. . The state is taking aggressive social distancing steps - bars, night clubs, breweries and wine tasting rooms should close and restaurants should focus on food delivery and takeout while maximizing social distancing for those who are inside their restaurant. . California is recommending older Californians (65+) socially isolate in their homes.  . The state is providing safe, wrap around services to vulnerable residents who are isolating at home – ramping up existing meal delivery and home visiting services.. The California Employee Development Department (EDD) is encouraging individuals who are unable to work due to exposure to COVID-19 to file a Disability Insurance claim. Californians unable to work because they are caring for an ill or quarantined family member can file a Paid Family Leave claim.  . The Governor removed the waiting period for unemployment and disability insurance for Californians who lose work as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak.  . EDD is also encouraging employers who are experiencing a slowdown in their businesses or services as a result of the Coronavirus impact on the economy to apply for an Unemployment Insurance work sharing program.  . The Governor declared a State of Emergency to make additional resources available, formalize emergency actions already underway across multiple state agencies and departments, and help the state prepare for broader spread of COVID-19.  . The California Department of Public Health's state laboratory in Richmond and 20 other public health department laboratories now have tests for the virus that causes COVID-19. . Twenty public health labs in California, including the Department of Public Health's state laboratory in Richmond, are now testing for the virus that causes COVID-19.. 